---
layout: page
permalink: /research/
title: research interests
description: towards a universal formulation of the density functional theory from first principles
author: A. Boulet
nav: false
---

The most successful theory of physics is unquestionably the quantum theory. This describes the way in which particles, like electrons, protons or neutrons (composing the atoms of matter: a nucleus of protons/neutrons in a cloud of electrons), atoms themselves, molecules (composed by connected atoms), photons (particles of light), or the now famous Higgs bosons, etc., behave at microscopic scales.

Despite the incredible accuracy of the quantum theory that has never been compromised by experiments for more than one century, the equations to solve in order to obtain a physical description of specific systems composed of a large number of particle interacting with each other, namely quantum many-body systems, remains impossible to solve without making approximations even with the increasing power of computers to perform numerical calculations. The study of the properties of such many-body systems falls under the condensed matter physics (solid, magnets, polymers, etc.), atomic physics (quantum gas of atoms, etc.), quantum chemistry (molecules, etc.), and nuclear physics (nuclei, neutron stars, etc.).

According to the quantum theory, we can calculate the properties of these systems directly from the microscopic interaction, e.g. electromagnetic, between their fundamental constituents. What makes this field of study interesting and exciting is the phenomenon of emergence, which is the appearance of totally unexpected and unpredicted behaviours in the many-body context. This occurs because the collective behavior is so different from what one would expect in regard to the rules governing the microscopic systems. Thus, many-body physics is intended to describe these quantum collective processes and emergent phenomena. To do so, a lot of methods have been developed in the past and we can schematically distinguish two separate kind of approaches.

On the one hand, the *ab initio* technics tend to solve the quantum equations, i.e. provide the properties of the systems, exactly by the use of well controlled approximations systematically improvable. However these approaches remains extremely costly numerically and then very limited and specific. One the other hand, the Density Functional Theory (DFT) relies on the accurate description of the density of the particles which will then encode the collective process. These provide a drastic simplification, as much conceptually as numerically, of the many-body problem since we are no longer interested in the individual evolution of each particle, but in the unique evolution of their global density. Thus, still today, the DFT is the most versatile and predictive microscopic theory to obtain a proper description of observations in a simple and unified framework. However, due to the fact that the functional is systematically adjusted empirically on some restricted observations, this powerful approach lack of predictive power in some cases and of the advantage of *ab initio* methods which can be systematically improvable without, in principle, relying on adjustment *a posteriori*.

In this context, my research aims to formulate and develop a universal (in the sense that it is applicable to a large class of many-body systems from condensed matter and atomics physics to quantum chemistry and nuclear physics) *ab initio* DFT by matching the both kind of approaches with advanced and rigorous many-body techniques while maintaining the advantages of the both too. The achievement of this project would be a decisive step towards the universal understanding of collective behavior and emergent phenomena occurring in many-body systems and open the way for new opportunities and applications. 
