---
layout: page
permalink: /resummation-of-diagrams/
title: semi-analytical resummation of many-body diagrams
description: non-empirical density functional theory
author: A. Boulet
nav: false
---

Right now, we are experiencing a pivotal period for nuclear physics with a renewal of ideas and concepts. One of the reason of this renewal in the field is the recent progress of effective field theories (EFT). These advances have improved our understanding of the nuclear interaction which are now directly related to the low-energy sector of the quantum chromodynamic (QCD). Such a new generation of nuclear interactions turns out to simplify many-body methods. This is why in parallel to the progress on the nuclear interaction itself, the approaches based on the resolution of the many-body Schrödinger equation, namely the ab initio methods, took advantage of these breakthroughs. Despite the power of ab initio methods and the exceptional improvements in the many-body techniques, these approaches in nuclear many-body problem do not offer the possibility to describe globally the richness of phenomena occurring in nuclear systems in a simple way. They are at present indeed restricted to the description of light to medium-mass nuclei, mostly focusing on their static properties.

On the other hand, the nuclear energy density functional (EDF), or density functional theory (DFT), approaches based on mean-field or beyond mean-field are remarkable in terms of predictivity. Still, it is often observed that they work well close or in the domain where the functionals were adjusted empirically, e.g. symmetric nuclear matter equation of state, binding energy and radii of nuclei close to the stability, etc. Nevertheless, a number of properties are not accounted for in the standard empirical functionals. These empirical functionals reached their limits in terms of predictivity and proper description of nuclear systems. New ideas and new ways to constrain the functionals are therefore desirable to increase the predictive power of the EDF approaches. In that sense, exact calculations could provide decisive hints to design new functionals driven by ab initio methods.

Even if the DFT approaches based on empirical adjustment seem to have reached their limit in term of predictive power and applicability, they remain the only microscopic approaches able to treat in a simple and unified framework the structure, the small and large amplitude dynamics, as well as the thermodynamical properties of nuclear systems. These approaches also allow to apprehend other domains at the frontier with nuclear physics and make connection with astrophysics, atomic physics, condensed matter, etc.

The ab initio methods do not lead in general to clear guidance for the functional form. Even if these approaches are directly connected to the bare nuclear interaction, they are numerical and they do not lead to analytical formulas in term of the one-body density. On the other hand, despite the complexity of the strong multi-body interaction between in-medium nucleons, the DFT framework illustrates the fact that nuclear systems can be rather well described by adopting a single-particle picture. Contrary to the ab initio theories, the EDF theory provides directly such description in a much simpler framework which usually does not require advanced numerical calculations. A natural way that the ab initio theory can impact the EDF is to provide pseudo-data that are not reachable by experiments. This was systematically done in the past. However, EDF approaches remains still rather empirical.


To render the functional less empirical, I have explored the possibility to answer the following question: *Can we connect the parameters of the DFT used in nuclear physics with the Low-Energy Constants (LEC) of the bare interaction?* It is a challenging problem since the goal is to obtain non-empirical functionals, depending only of the LEC and one-body density without other parameters. The strong renormalization of the bare nuclear interaction by the nuclear medium is a key issue. The aim of this work was to introduce a non-empirical DFT for strongly interacting systems inspired by the recent progress of the Effective Field Theory (EFT) associated with resummation techniques. More preciselly, the strategy employed was based on the analytical resummation of many-body diagrams in a Green’s function framework to be able to capture non-perturbative correlations of the nuclear medium. One advantage of these resummations of many-body contributions is that they account for beyond mean-field effects to all orders in the LEC. A second advantage is that these resummation schemes are mostly analytical in terms of the density. For more details, see the page devoted to my <a href="https://antoineboulet.github.io/news/phd_defense/" target="_blank">Ph. D.</a>

#### Non-empirical density functional theory for systems close to unitarity

I first worked on the relationship between the neutron matter and the universal unitarity gas which is largely studied in ultra-cold atomic physics. I have contributed to propose a new non-empirical functional expressed in term of the LEC of the bare two-body interaction, the s-wave scattering length and effective range, reproducing the equation of state of both neutron matter and cold atoms. We have shown that these developments are able to reconcile the parameters generally used in the empirical nuclear DFT with the properties of the strong nuclear interaction [D. Lacroix, A. Boulet, M. Grasso, and C.-J. Yang, <a href="https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.95.054306" target="_blank">Phys. Rev. C **95**, 054306</a> (2017)]. 

#### Quasi-particle properties of Fermi gas from low-density to unitary limit

To properly incorporate the quasi-particle properties in the theory required for a proper description of the linear response for instance [A. Boulet and D. Lacroix, <a href="https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevC.97.014301" target="_blank">Phys. Rev. C **97**, 014301</a> (2018)], I then focused on the self-energy encoding the quasi-particle properties (in particular the effective mass) and connected to the Landau theory of Fermi liquid. As for the non-empirical DFT introduced, the goal was to obtain practical and explicit dependency of the self-energy as function of the density and LEC. I have proposed a consistent approximate form of the self-energy and consequently of the quasi-particle properties associated to the non-empirical functional proposed. This extension to quasi-particle properties describes quantitatively well the behavior of homogeneous dilute Fermi gas beyond the perturbative approach [A. Boulet and D. Lacroix, <a href="https://doi.org/10.1088/1361-6471/ab2f0b" target="_blank">J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. **46**, 105104</a> (2019)].
